---
title: "When should We use Machine learning?"
author: anguzman
---

When Should We Use Machine Learning?

Despite the immense excitement and hype generated by people both inside and outside the field, ML is not a magic solution that can solve all problems. Therefore, we must ask ourselves: When should we use ML?

The Problem Is Too Complex for Coding:

When rules depend on too many variables—and when those rules overlap or require fine-tuning—it becomes extremely difficult for a human to code them accurately. The classic example is spam detection.

The Problem Is Constantly Changing

You might be able to manually classify a few hundred emails as spam or not spam. However, this becomes tedious and inefficient when dealing with millions of emails. ML solutions excel at handling large-scale, dynamic problems.

It Is a Perceptive Problem

Perception involves taking in information from the world through our senses—sight, smell, touch, hearing, and taste—and making sense of it. ML can help recognize patterns in such sensory data. Video to text helps people with visual difficulties.

It Is an Unstudied Phenomenon

If we have no prior experience studying a phenomenon, ML can help us explore and understand it. For example, we can use clustering techniques to group similar data points and begin to describe the nature or characteristics of the phenomenon.

The Problem Has a Simple Objective

When the problem has one clearly defined goal, ML can be used to optimize performance by maximizing rewards during training.
Example: Training an agent to play video games.

It Is Cost-Effective

Machine learning can reduce the need for expensive hardware resources or manual labor. It helps automate repetitive tasks, lowering the risk of human error and increasing overall efficiency.
